Computer vision tasks include methods for acquiring, processing, analyzing, and understanding digital images, and extraction of high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, e.g.
in the form of decisions.
As a scientific discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images.
The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences, views from multiple cameras, or multi-dimensional data from a medical scanner.
As a technological discipline, computer vision seeks to apply its theories and models for the construction of computer vision systems.
Machine vision refers to a systems engineering discipline, especially in the context of factory automation.
In more recent times, the terms computer vision and machine vision have converged to a greater degree.
In the late 1960s, computer vision began at universities that were pioneering artificial intelligence.
It was meant to mimic the human visual system as a stepping stone to endowing robots with intelligent behavior.
by attaching a camera to a computer and having it "describe what it saw".
By the 1990s, some of the previous research topics became more active than others.
Research in projective 3-D reconstructions led to better understanding of camera calibration.
With the advent of optimization methods for camera calibration, it was realized that a lot of the ideas were already explored in bundle adjustment theory from the field of photogrammetry.
This led to methods for sparse 3-D reconstructions of scenes from multiple images.
Progress was made on the dense stereo correspondence problem and further multi-view stereo techniques.
At the same time, variations of graph cut were used to solve image segmentation.
This decade also marked the first time statistical learning techniques were used in practice to recognize faces in images (see Eigenface).
Toward the end of the 1990s, a significant change came about with the increased interaction between the fields of computer graphics and computer vision.
This included image-based rendering, image morphing, view interpolation, panoramic image stitching and early light-field rendering.
The advancement of Deep Learning techniques has brought further life to the field of computer vision.
The accuracy of deep learning algorithms on several benchmark computer vision data sets for tasks ranging from classification, segmentation and optical flow has surpassed prior methods.
Solid-state physics is another field that is closely related to computer vision.
Most computer vision systems rely on image sensors, which detect electromagnetic radiation, which is typically in the form of either visible, infrared or ultraviolet light.
The sensors are designed using quantum physics.
The process by which light interacts with surfaces is explained using physics.
Physics explains the behavior of optics which are a core part of most imaging systems.
Sophisticated image sensors even require quantum mechanics to provide a complete understanding of the image formation process.
The network correctly detects the starfish.
However, the weakly weighted association between ringed texture and sea urchin also confers a weak signal to the latter from one of two intermediate nodes.
In addition, a shell that was not included in the training gives a weak signal for the oval shape, also resulting in a weak signal for the sea urchin output.
These weak signals may result in a false positive result for sea urchin.In reality, textures and outlines would not be represented by single nodes, but rather by associated weight patterns of multiple nodes. Neurobiology has greatly influenced the development of computer vision algorithms.
Over the last century, there has been an extensive study of eyes, neurons, and brain structures devoted to the processing of visual stimuli in both humans and various animals.
This has led to a coarse yet convoluted description of how natural vision systems operate in order to solve certain vision-related tasks.
These results have led to a sub-field within computer vision where artificial systems are designed to mimic the processing and behavior of biological systems at different levels of complexity.
Also, some of the learning-based methods developed within computer vision (e.g.
neural net and deep learning based image and feature analysis and classification) have their background in neurobiology.
The Neocognitron, a neural network developed in the 1970s by Kunihiko Fukushima, is an early example of computer vision taking direct inspiration from neurobiology, specifically the primary visual cortex.
Some strands of computer vision research are closely related to the study of biological visionindeed, just as many strands of AI research are closely tied with research into human intelligence and the use of stored knowledge to interpret, integrate, and utilize visual information.
The field of biological vision studies and models the physiological processes behind visual perception in humans and other animals.
Computer vision, on the other hand, develops and describes the algorithms implemented in software and hardware behind artificial vision systems.
An interdisciplinary exchange between biological and computer vision has proven fruitful for both fields.
A detailed understanding of these environments is required to navigate through them.
Information about the environment could be provided by a computer vision system, acting as a vision sensor and providing high-level information about the environment and the robot .
Besides the above-mentioned views on computer vision, many of the related research topics can also be studied from a purely mathematical point of view.
For example, many methods in computer vision are based on statistics, optimization or geometry.
Finally, a significant part of the field is devoted to the implementation aspect of computer vision; how existing methods can be realized in various combinations of software and hardware, or how these methods can be modified in order to gain processing speed without losing too much performance.
Computer vision is also used in fashion eCommerce, inventory management, patent search, furniture, and the beauty industry.
The fields most closely related to computer vision are image processing, image analysis and machine vision.
There is a significant overlap in the range of techniques and applications that these cover.
This implies that the basic techniques that are used and developed in these fields are similar, something which can be interpreted as there is only one field with different names.
On the other hand, it appears to be necessary for research groups, scientific journals, conferences, and companies to present or market themselves as belonging specifically to one of these fields and, hence, various characterizations which distinguish each of the fields from the others have been presented.
In image processing, the input and output are both images, whereas in computer vision, the input is an image or video, and the output could be an enhanced image, an analysis of the image's content, or even a system's behavior based on that analysis.
Computer graphics produces image data from 3D models, and computer vision often produces 3D models from image data.
There is also a trend towards a combination of the two disciplines, e.g., as explored in augmented reality.
The following characterizations appear relevant but should not be taken as universally accepted:  Image processing and image analysis tend to focus on 2D images, how to transform one image to another, e.g., by pixel-wise operations such as contrast enhancement, local operations such as edge extraction or noise removal, or geometrical transformations such as rotating the image.
This characterization implies that image processinganalysis neither requires assumptions nor produces interpretations about the image content.
 Computer vision includes 3D analysis from 2D images.
This analyzes the 3D scene projected onto one or several images, e.g., how to reconstruct structure or other information about the 3D scene from one or several images.
Computer vision often relies on more or less complex assumptions about the scene depicted in an image.
 Machine vision is the process of applying a range of technologies and methods to provide imaging-based automatic inspection, process control, and robot guidance).
This implies that image sensor technologies and control theory often are integrated with the processing of image data to control a robot and that real-time processing is emphasized by means of efficient implementations in hardware and software.
It also implies that external conditions such as lighting can be and are often more controlled in machine vision than they are in general computer vision, which can enable the use of different algorithms.
 There is also a field called imaging which primarily focuses on the process of producing images, but sometimes also deals with the processing and analysis of images.
For example, medical imaging includes substantial work on the analysis of image data in medical applications.
Progress in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has improved the accurate detection of disease in medical images, particularly in cardiology, pathology, dermatology, and radiology.
 Finally, pattern recognition is a field that uses various methods to extract information from signals in general, mainly based on statistical approaches and artificial neural networks.
A significant part of this field is devoted to applying these methods to image data.
Photogrammetry also overlaps with computer vision, e.g., stereophotogrammetry vs.
computer stereo vision.
Applications range from tasks such as industrial machine vision systems which, say, inspect bottles speeding by on a production line, to research into artificial intelligence and computers or robots that can comprehend the world around them.
The computer vision and machine vision fields have significant overlap.
Computer vision covers the core technology of automated image analysis which is used in many fields.
Machine vision usually refers to a process of combining automated image analysis with other methods and technologies to provide automated inspection and robot guidance in industrial applications.
In many computer-vision applications, computers are pre-programmed to solve a particular task, but methods based on learning are now becoming increasingly common.
Examples of applications of computer vision include systems for: have enabled researchers to build models that are able to generate and reconstruct 3D shapes from single or multi-view depth maps or silhouettes seamlessly and efficiently.
 Controlling processes, e.g., an industrial robot;  Detecting events, e.g., for visual surveillance or people counting, e.g., in the restaurant industry;  Interaction, e.g., as the input to a device for computer-human interaction;  MediaPipe, an open-source framework from Google for AI edge device computing, e.g., face detection, image classification, object detection;  monitoring agricultural crops, e.g.
an open-source vision transformers model has been developed to help farmers automatically detect strawberry diseases with 98.4 accuracy.
 Modeling objects or environments, e.g., medical image analysis or topographical modeling;  Navigation, e.g., by an autonomous vehicle or mobile robot;  Organizing information, e.g., for indexing databases of images and image sequences.
Tracking surfaces or planes in 3D coordinates for allowing Augmented Reality experiences.
Analyzing the condition of facilities in industry or construction.
Automatic real-time lip-reading for devices and apps to assist people with disabilities.
For 2024, the leading areas of computer vision were industry (market size US5.22 billion), medicine (market size US2.6 billion), military (market size US996.2 million).
's Visual Media Reasoning concept video One of the most prominent application fields is medical computer vision, or medical image processing, characterized by the extraction of information from image data to diagnose a patient.
An example of this is the detection of tumours, arteriosclerosis or other malign changes, and a variety of dental pathologies; measurements of organ dimensions, blood flow, etc.
It also supports medical research by providing new information: e.g., about the structure of the brain or the quality of medical treatments.
Applications of computer vision in the medical area also include enhancement of images interpreted by humansultrasonic images or X-ray images, for exampleto reduce the influence of noise.
A second application area in computer vision is in industry, sometimes called machine vision, where information is extracted for the purpose of supporting a production process.
One example is quality control where details or final products are being automatically inspected in order to find defects.
One of the most prevalent fields for such inspecti is the Wafer industry in which every single Wafer is being measured and inspected for inaccuracies or defects to prevent a computer chip from coming to market in an unusable manner.
Another example is a measurement of the position and orientation of details to be picked up by a robot arm.
Machine vision is also heavily used in the agricultural processes to remove undesirable foodstuff from bulk material, a process called optical sorting.
Another variation of this finger mold sensor are sensors that contain a camera suspended in silicon.
The silicon forms a dome around the outside of the camera and embedded in the silicon are point markers that are equally spaced.
These cameras can then be placed on devices such as robotic hands in order to allow the computer to receive highly accurate tactile data.
Other application areas include:  Support of visual effects creation for cinema and broadcast, e.g., camera tracking (match moving).
 Driver drowsiness detection  Tracking and counting organisms in the biological sciences (for example in leaf counting for food crops).
Each of the application areas described above employ a range of computer vision tasks; more or less well-defined measurement problems or processing problems, which can be solved using a variety of methods.
Some examples of typical computer vision tasks are presented below.
Computer vision tasks include methods for acquiring, processing, analyzing and understanding digital images, and extraction of high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, e.g., in the forms of decisions.
 Object recognition (also called object classification)one or several pre-specified or learned objects or object classes can be recognized, usually together with their 2D positions in the image or 3D poses in the scene.
Blippar, Google Goggles, and LikeThat provide stand-alone programs that illustrate this functionality.
 Identificationan individual instance of an object is recognized.
Examples include identification of a specific person's face or fingerprint, identification of handwritten digits, or the identification of a specific vehicle.
 Detectionthe image data are scanned for specific objects along with their locations.
Examples include the detection of an obstacle in the car's field of view and possible abnormal cells or tissues in medical images or the detection of a vehicle in an automatic road toll system.
Detection based on relatively simple and fast computations is sometimes used for finding smaller regions of interesting image data which can be further analyzed by more computationally demanding techniques to produce a correct interpretation.
Currently, the best algorithms for such tasks are based on convolutional neural networks.
An illustration of their capabilities is given by the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge; this is a benchmark in object classification and detection, with millions of images and 1000 object classes used in the competition.
Performance of convolutional neural networks on the ImageNet tests is now close to that of humans.
 Emotion recognitiona subset of facial recognition, emotion recognition refers to the process of classifying human emotions.
Psychologists caution, however, that internal emotions cannot be reliably detected from faces.
 Shape Recognition Technology (SRT) in people counter systems differentiating human beings (head and shoulder patterns) from objects.
 Human activity recognition - deals with recognizing the activity from a series of video frames, such as, if the person is picking up an object or walking.
Several tasks relate to motion estimation, where an image sequence is processed to produce an estimate of the velocity either at each points in the image or in the 3D scene or even of the camera that produces the images.
Examples of such tasks are:  Egomotiondetermining the 3D rigid motion (rotation and translation) of the camera from an image sequence produced by the camera.
 Trackingfollowing the movements of a (usually) smaller set of interest points or objects (e.g., vehicles, objects, humans or other organisms parts (also referred to as spatial-taxon scene hierarchy), while the visual salience is often implemented as spatial and temporal attention.
 Segmentation or co-segmentation of one or multiple videos into a series of per-frame foreground masks while maintaining its temporal semantic continuity.
 High-level processing  At this step, the input is typically a small set of data, for example, a set of points or an image region, which is assumed to contain a specific object.
with a LiDAR sensor There are many kinds of computer vision systems; however, all of them contain these basic elements: a power source, at least one image acquisition device (camera, ccd, etc.), a processor, and control and communication cables or some kind of wireless interconnection mechanism.
In addition, a practical vision system contains software, as well as a display in order to monitor the system.
Vision systems for inner spaces, as most industrial ones, contain an illumination system and may be placed in a controlled environment.
Furthermore, a completed system includes many accessories, such as camera supports, cables, and connectors.
Most computer vision systems use visible-light cameras passively viewing a scene at frame rates of at most 60 frames per second (usually far slower).
A few computer vision systems use image-acquisition hardware with active illumination or something other than visible light or both, such as structured-light 3D scanners, thermographic cameras, hyperspectral imagers, radar imaging, lidar scanners, magnetic resonance images, side-scan sonar, synthetic aperture sonar, etc.
Such hardware captures "images" that are then processed often using the same computer vision algorithms used to process visible-light images.
While traditional broadcast and consumer video systems operate at a rate of 30 frames per second, advances in digital signal processing and consumer graphics hardware has made high-speed image acquisition, processing, and display possible for real-time systems on the order of hundreds to thousands of frames per second.
For applications in robotics, fast, real-time video systems are critically important and often can simplify the processing needed for certain algorithms.
When combined with a high-speed projector, fast image acquisition allows 3D measurement and feature tracking to be realized.
Egocentric vision systems are composed of a wearable camera that automatically take pictures from a first-person perspective.
As of 2016, vision processing units are emerging as a new class of processors to complement CPUs and graphics processing units (GPUs) in this role.
 Chessboard detection  Computational imaging  Computational photography  Computer audition  Egocentric vision  Machine vision glossary  Space mapping  TeknomoFernandez algorithm  Vision science  Visual agnosia  Visual perception  Visual system .
 Outline of computer vision  List of emerging technologies  List of robotics software  Outline of artificial intelligence .
                       .
 https:sites.usc.eduiris-cvlab USC Iris computer vision conference list  http:www.cvpapers.comindex.html Computer vision papers on the web  a complete list of papers of the most relevant computer vision conferences.
 http:www.computervisiononline.com Computer Vision Online  news, source code, datasets and job offers related to computer vision  http:homepages.inf.ed.ac.ukrbfCVonline CVonline  Bob Fisher's Compendium of Computer Vision.
 https:britishmachinevisionassociation.github.io British Machine Vision Association  supporting computer vision research within the UK via the BMVC and MIUA conferences, Annals of the BMVA (open-source journal), BMVA Summer School and one-day meetings  https:github.comjoehoellerNVIDIA-GPU-Tensor-Core-Accelerator-PyTorch-OpenCV Computer Vision Container, Joe Hoeller GitHub: Widely adopted open-source container for GPU accelerated computer vision applications.
Used by researchers, universities, private companies, as well as the U.S.