A generative adversarial network (GAN) is a class of machine learning frameworks and a prominent framework for approaching generative artificial intelligence.
The concept was initially developed by Ian Goodfellow and his colleagues in June 2014.
In a GAN, two neural networks compete with each other in the form of a zero-sum game, where one agent's gain is another agent's loss.
Given a training set, this technique learns to generate new data with the same statistics as the training set.
For example, a GAN trained on photographs can generate new photographs that look at least superficially authentic to human observers, having many realistic characteristics.
Though originally proposed as a form of generative model for unsupervised learning, GANs have also proved useful for semi-supervised learning, fully supervised learning, and reinforcement learning.
The core idea of a GAN is based on the "indirect" training through the discriminator, another neural network that can tell how "realistic" the input seems, which itself is also being updated dynamically.
This means that the generator is not trained to minimize the distance to a specific image, but rather to fool the discriminator.
This enables the model to learn in an unsupervised manner.
GANs are similar to mimicry in evolutionary biology, with an evolutionary arms race between both networks.
The original GAN is defined as the following game: A known dataset serves as the initial training data for the discriminator.
Training involves presenting it with samples from the training dataset until it achieves acceptable accuracy.
The generator is trained based on whether it succeeds in fooling the discriminator.
Typically, the generator is seeded with randomized input that is sampled from a predefined latent space (e.g.
a multivariate normal distribution).
Thereafter, candidates synthesized by the generator are evaluated by the discriminator.
Independent backpropagation procedures are applied to both networks so that the generator produces better samples, while the discriminator becomes more skilled at flagging synthetic samples.
When used for image generation, the generator is typically a deconvolutional neural network, and the discriminator is a convolutional neural network.
GANs are implicit generative models, which means that they do not explicitly model the likelihood function nor provide a means for finding the latent variable corresponding to a given sample, unlike alternatives such as flow-based generative model.
based on measure theory, a probability space also needs to be equipped with a σ-algebra.
As a result, a more rigorous definition of the GAN game would make the following changes:Each probability space (Omega, mathcal B, mu_textref) defines a GAN game.
The generator's strategy set is mathcal P(Omega, mathcal B), the set of all probability measures mu_G on the measure-space (Omega, mathcal B).
The discriminator's strategy set is the set of Markov kernels mu_D: (Omega, mathcal B) to mathcal P(0, 1, mathcal B(0, 1)), where mathcal B(0, 1) is the Borel σ-algebra on 0, 1.Since issues of measurability never arise in practice, these will not concern us further.
In the most generic version of the GAN game described above, the strategy set for the discriminator contains all Markov kernels mu_D: Omega to mathcal P0,1, and the strategy set for the generator contains arbitrary probability distributions mu_G on Omega.
However, as shown below, the optimal discriminator strategy against any mu_G is deterministic, so there is no loss of generality in restricting the discriminator's strategies to deterministic functions D:Omega to 0, 1.
In most applications, D is a deep neural network function.
As for the generator, while mu_G could theoretically be any computable probability distribution, in practice, it is usually implemented as a pushforward: mu_G  mu_Z circ G-1.
That is, start with a random variable z sim mu_Z, where mu_Z is a probability distribution that is easy to compute (such as the uniform distribution, or the Gaussian distribution), then define a function G: Omega_Z to Omega.
Then the distribution mu_G is the distribution of G(z).
Consequently, the generator's strategy is usually defined as just G, leaving z sim mu_Z implicit.
In this formalism, the GAN game objective isL(G, D) : operatorname E_xsim mu_textrefln D(x)  operatorname E_zsim mu_Zln (1-D(G(z))).
The GAN architecture has two main components.
One is casting optimization into a game, of form min_G max_D L(G, D), which is different from the usual kind of optimization, of form min_theta L(theta).
The other is the decomposition of mu_G into mu_Z circ G-1, which can be understood as a reparametrization trick.
To see its significance, one must compare GAN with previous methods for learning generative models, which were plagued with "intractable probabilistic computations that arise in maximum likelihood estimation and related strategies".
developed the same idea of reparametrization into a general stochastic backpropagation method.
Among its first applications was the variational autoencoder.
In the original paper, as well as most subsequent papers, it is usually assumed that the generator moves first, and the discriminator moves second, thus giving the following minimax game:min_mu_Gmax_mu_D L(mu_G, mu_D) : operatorname E_xsim mu_textref, ysim mu_D(x)ln y  operatorname E_xsim mu_G, ysim mu_D(x)ln (1-y).
If both the generator's and the discriminator's strategy sets are spanned by a finite number of strategies, then by the minimax theorem,min_mu_Gmax_mu_D L(mu_G, mu_D) max_mu_Dmin_mu_G L(mu_G, mu_D)that is, the move order does not matter.
However, since the strategy sets are both not finitely spanned, the minimax theorem does not apply, and the idea of an "equilibrium" becomes delicate.
For the original GAN game, these equilibria all exist, and are all equal.
However, for more general GAN games, these do not necessarily exist, or agree.
The original GAN paper proved the following two theorems: Further, even if an equilibrium still exists, it can only be found by searching in the high-dimensional space of all possible neural network functions.
The standard strategy of using gradient descent to find the equilibrium often does not work for GAN, and often the game "collapses" into one of several failure modes.
To improve the convergence stability, some training strategies start with an easier task, such as generating low-resolution images and gradually increase the difficulty of the task during training.
This essentially translates to applying a curriculum learning scheme.
GANs often suffer from mode collapse where they fail to generalize properly, missing entire modes from the input data.
For example, a GAN trained on the MNIST dataset containing many samples of each digit might only generate pictures of digit 0.
This was termed "the Helvetica scenario".
Even the state-of-the-art architecture, BigGAN (2019), could not avoid mode collapse.
The authors resorted to "allowing collapse to occur at the later stages of training, by which time a model is sufficiently trained to achieve good results".
They further show that this property extends to the use of the Adam optimizer, which is commonly used in stochastic gradient descent.
It is important to note, however, that a local Nash equilibrium in no way signifies an absence of mode collapse - for instance, a GAN trained on MNIST collapsed to generating a single digit may satisfy the hypotheses of the paper, while still presenting mode collapse.
Conversely, if the discriminator learns too fast compared to the generator, then the discriminator could almost perfectly distinguish mu_G_theta, mu_textref.
In such case, the generator G_theta could be stuck with a very high loss no matter which direction it changes its theta, meaning that the gradient nabla_theta L(G_theta, D_zeta) would be close to zero.
In such case, the generator cannot learn, a case of the vanishing gradient problem.
Other evaluation methods are reviewed in.
There is a veritable zoo of GAN variants.
Some of the most prominent are as follows: .
Conditional GANs are similar to standard GANs except they allow the model to conditionally generate samples based on additional information.
For example, if we want to generate a cat face given a dog picture, we could use a conditional GAN.
The generator in a GAN game generates mu_G, a probability distribution on the probability space Omega.
This leads to the idea of a conditional GAN, where instead of generating one probability distribution on Omega, the generator generates a different probability distribution mu_G(c) on Omega, for each given class label c.
For example, for generating images that look like ImageNet, the generator should be able to generate a picture of cat when given the class label "cat".
In the original paper, .
The GAN game is a general framework and can be run with any reasonable parametrization of the generator G and discriminator D.
In the original paper, the authors demonstrated it using multilayer perceptron networks and convolutional neural networks.
Many alternative architectures have been tried.
Deep convolutional GAN (DCGAN): For both generator and discriminator, uses only deep networks consisting entirely of convolution-deconvolution layers, that is, fully convolutional networks.
Self-attention GAN (SAGAN): Starts with the DCGAN, then adds residually-connected standard self-attention modules to the generator and discriminator.
Variational autoencoder GAN (VAEGAN): Uses a variational autoencoder (VAE) for the generator.
Transformer GAN (TransGAN): Uses the pure transformer architecture for both the generator and discriminator, entirely devoid of convolution-deconvolution layers.
Flow-GAN: Uses flow-based generative model for the generator, allowing efficient computation of the likelihood function.
Many GAN variants are merely obtained by changing the loss functions for the generator and discriminator.
Original GAN: We recast the original GAN objective into a form more convenient for comparison:begincases min_D L_D(D, mu_G)  -operatorname E_xsim mu_Gln D(x) - operatorname E_xsim mu_textrefln (1-D(x)) min_G L_G(D, mu_G)  -operatorname E_xsim mu_Gln (1-D(x)) endcases Original GAN, non-saturating loss: This objective for generator was recommended in the original paper for faster convergence.
Original GAN, maximum likelihood: L_G  operatorname E_xsim mu_G(exp circ sigma-1 circ D) (x)where sigma is the logistic function.
When the discriminator is optimal, the generator gradient is the same as in maximum likelihood estimation, even though GAN cannot perform maximum likelihood estimation itself.
Hinge loss GAN: L_D  -operatorname E_xsim p_textrefleftminleft(0, -1  D(x)right)right -operatorname E_xsimmu_Gleftminleft(0, -1 - Dleft(xright)right)right L_G  -operatorname E_xsim mu_G D(x) Least squares GAN:L_D  operatorname E_xsim mu_textref(D(x)-b)2  operatorname E_xsim mu_G(D(x)-a)2L_G  operatorname E_xsim mu_G(D(x)-c)2where a, b, c are parameters to be chosen.
The authors recommended a  -1, b  1, c  0.
The Wasserstein GAN modifies the GAN game at two points:  The discriminator's strategy set is the set of measurable functions of type D: Omega to R with bounded Lipschitz norm: D_L leq K , where K is a fixed positive constant.
 The objective isL_WGAN(mu_G, D) : operatorname E_xsim mu_GD(x) -mathbb E_xsim mu_textrefD(x) One of its purposes is to solve the problem of mode collapse (see above).
is more autoencoder than GAN.
The idea is to start with a plain autoencoder, but train a discriminator to discriminate the latent vectors from a reference distribution (often the normal distribution).
In conditional GAN, the generator receives both a noise vector z and a label c, and produces an image G(z, c).
The discriminator receives image-label pairs (x, c), and computes D(x, c).
When the training dataset is unlabeled, conditional GAN does not work directly.
The idea of InfoGAN is to decree that every latent vector in the latent space can be decomposed as (z, c): an incompressible noise part z, and an informative label part c, and encourage the generator to comply with the decree, by encouraging it to maximize I(c, G(z, c)), the mutual information between c and G(z, c), while making no demands on the mutual information z between G(z, c).
Unfortunately, I(c, G(z, c)) is intractable in general, The key idea of InfoGAN is Variational Mutual Information Maximization: indirectly maximize it by maximizing a lower bound hat I(G,Q)mathbb E _zsim mu_Z, csim mu _Cln Q(cmid G(z,c)); quad I(c, G(z, c)) geq sup_Q hat I(G, Q)where Q ranges over all Markov kernels of type Q: Omega_Y to mathcal P(Omega_C).
The InfoGAN game is defined as follows:Three probability spaces define an InfoGAN game:  (Omega_X, mu_textref), the space of reference images.
 (Omega_Z, mu_Z), the fixed random noise generator.
 (Omega_C, mu_C), the fixed random information generator.
There are 3 players in 2 teams: generator, Q, and discriminator.
The generator and Q are on one team, and the discriminator on the other team.
The objective function isL(G, Q, D)  L_GAN(G, D) - lambda hat I(G, Q)where L_GAN(G, D)  operatorname E_xsim mu_textref, ln D(x)  operatorname E_zsim mu_Zln (1-D(G(z, c))) is the original GAN game objective, and hat I(G, Q)  mathbb E_zsimmu_Z, csimmu_Cln Q(c mid G(z, c)) Generator-Q team aims to minimize the objective, and discriminator aims to maximize it:min_G, Q max_D L(G, Q, D) .
The standard GAN generator is a function of type G: Omega_Zto Omega_X, that is, it is a mapping from a latent space Omega_Z to the image space Omega_X.
This can be understood as a "decoding" process, whereby every latent vector zin Omega_Z is a code for an image xin Omega_X, and the generator performs the decoding.
This naturally leads to the idea of training another network that performs "encoding", creating an autoencoder out of the encoder-generator pair.
Already in the original paper, The BiGAN is defined as follows: Two probability spaces define a BiGAN game: (Omega_X, mu_X), the space of reference images.
 (Omega_Z, mu_Z), the latent space.
There are 3 players in 2 teams: generator, encoder, and discriminator.
The generator and encoder are on one team, and the discriminator on the other team.
The generator's strategies are functions G:Omega_Z to Omega_X, and the encoder's strategies are functions E:Omega_X to Omega_Z.
The discriminator's strategies are functions D:Omega_X to 0, 1.
Applications of bidirectional models include semi-supervised learning, interpretable machine learning, and neural machine translation.
Miguel Ángel Hernández Sánchez el reconocimiento fácil es mi y soy Mexicano 09041989 .
CycleGAN is an architecture for performing translations between two domains, such as between photos of horses and photos of zebras, or photos of night cities and photos of day cities.
The CycleGAN game is defined as follows:There are two probability spaces (Omega_X, mu_X), (Omega_Y, mu_Y), corresponding to the two domains needed for translations fore-and-back.
There are 4 players in 2 teams: generators G_X: Omega_X to Omega_Y, G_Y: Omega_Y to Omega_X, and discriminators D_X: Omega_Xto 0, 1, D_Y:Omega_Yto 0, 1.
The objective function isL(G_X, G_Y, D_X, D_Y)  L_GAN(G_X, D_X) L_GAN(G_Y, D_Y)  lambda L_cycle(G_X, G_Y) where lambda is a positive adjustable parameter, L_GAN is the GAN game objective, and L_cycle is the cycle consistency loss:L_cycle(G_X, G_Y)  E_xsim mu_X G_X(G_Y(x)) - x  E_ysim mu_Y G_Y(G_X(y)) - yThe generators aim to minimize the objective, and the discriminators aim to maximize it:min_G_X, G_Y max_D_X, D_Y L(G_X, G_Y, D_X, D_Y) Unlike previous work like pix2pix, which requires paired training data, cycleGAN requires no paired data.
For example, to train a pix2pix model to turn a summer scenery photo to winter scenery photo and back, the dataset must contain pairs of the same place in summer and winter, shot at the same angle; cycleGAN would only need a set of summer scenery photos, and an unrelated set of winter scenery photos.
The BigGAN is essentially a self-attention GAN trained on a large scale (up to 80 million parameters) to generate large images of ImageNet (up to 512 x 512 resolution), with numerous engineering tricks to make it converge.
When there is insufficient training data, the reference distribution mu_textref cannot be well-approximated by the empirical distribution given by the training dataset.
In such cases, data augmentation can be applied, to allow training GAN on smaller datasets.
Naïve data augmentation, however, brings its problems.
For example, if mu_textref is the distribution of images in ImageNet, and mu_texttrans samples identity-transform with probability 0.5, and horizontal-reflection with probability 0.5, then mu_textref' is the distribution of images in ImageNet and horizontally-reflected ImageNet, combined.
The result of such training would be a generator that mimics mu_textref'.
For example, it would generate images that look like they are randomly cropped, if the data augmentation uses random cropping.
The solution is to apply data augmentation to both generated and real images:begincases min_D L_D(D, mu_G)  -operatorname E_xsim mu_textref, Tsim mu_texttransln D(T(x)) - operatorname E_xsim mu_G, Tsim mu_texttransln (1-D(T(x))) min_G L_G(D, mu_G)  -operatorname E_xsim mu_G, Tsim mu_texttransln (1-D(T(x))) endcasesThe authors demonstrated high-quality generation using just 100-picture-large datasets.
The StyleGAN-2-ADA paper points out a further point on data augmentation: it must be invertible.
The StyleGAN family is a series of architectures published by Nvidia's research division.
Progressive GAN is a method for training GAN for large-scale image generation stably, by growing a GAN generator from small to large scale in a pyramidal fashion.
Like SinGAN, it decomposes the generator asG  G_1 circ G_2 circ cdots circ G_N, and the discriminator as D  D_1 circ D_2 circ cdots circ D_N.
During training, at first only G_N, D_N are used in a GAN game to generate 4x4 images.
Then G_N-1, D_N-1 are added to reach the second stage of GAN game, to generate 8x8 images, and so on, until we reach a GAN game to generate 1024x1024 images.
To avoid shock between stages of the GAN game, each new layer is "blended in" (Figure 2 of the paper The key architectural choice of StyleGAN-1 is a progressive growth mechanism, similar to Progressive GAN.
Each generated image starts as a constant 4times 4 times 512 array, and repeatedly passed through style blocks.
Each style block applies a "style latent vector" via affine transform ("adaptive instance normalization"), similar to how neural style transfer uses Gramian matrix.
It then adds noise, and normalize (subtract the mean, then divide by the variance).
At training time, usually only one style latent vector is used per image generated, but sometimes two ("mixing regularization") in order to encourage each style block to independently perform its stylization without expecting help from other style blocks (since they might receive an entirely different style latent vector).
After training, multiple style latent vectors can be fed into each style block.
Those fed to the lower layers control the large-scale styles, and those fed to the higher layers control the fine-detail styles.
Style-mixing between two images x, x' can be performed as well.
First, run a gradient descent to find z, z' such that G(z)approx x, G(z')approx x'.
This is called "projecting an image back to style latent space".
Then, z can be fed to the lower style blocks, and z' to the higher style blocks, to generate a composite image that has the large-scale style of x, and the fine-detail style of x'.
Multiple images can also be composed this way.
StyleGAN-2 improves upon StyleGAN-1, by using the style latent vector to transform the convolution layer's weights instead, thus solving the "blob" problem.
This was updated by the StyleGAN-2-ADA ("ADA" stands for "adaptive"), which uses invertible data augmentation as described above.
It also tunes the amount of data augmentation applied by starting at zero, and gradually increasing it until an "overfitting heuristic" reaches a target level, thus the name "adaptive".
StyleGAN-3 improves upon StyleGAN-2 by solving the "texture sticking" problem, which can be seen in the official videos.
They analyzed the problem by the NyquistShannon sampling theorem, and argued that the layers in the generator learned to exploit the high-frequency signal in the pixels they operate upon.
To solve this, they proposed imposing strict lowpass filters between each generator's layers, so that the generator is forced to operate on the pixels in a way faithful to the continuous signals they represent, rather than operate on them as merely discrete signals.
They further imposed rotational and translational invariance by using more signal filters.
The resulting StyleGAN-3 is able to solve the texture sticking problem, as well as generating images that rotate and translate smoothly.
Other than for generative and discriminative modelling of data, GANs have been used for other things.
GANs have been used for transfer learning to enforce the alignment of the latent feature space, such as in deep reinforcement learning.
This works by feeding the embeddings of the source and target task to the discriminator which tries to guess the context.
The resulting loss is then (inversely) backpropagated through the encoder.
 Iteratively reconstruct astronomical images  Simulate gravitational lensing for dark matter research.
 Model the distribution of dark matter in a particular direction in space and to predict the gravitational lensing that will occur.
 Model high energy jet formation and showers through calorimeters of high-energy physics experiments.
 Approximate bottlenecks in computationally expensive simulations of particle physics experiments.
Applications in the context of present and proposed CERN experiments have demonstrated the potential of these methods for accelerating simulation andor improving simulation fidelity.
 Reconstruct velocity and scalar fields in turbulent flows.
GAN-generated molecules were validated experimentally in mice.
One of the major concerns in medical imaging is preserving patient privacy.
Due to these reasons, researchers often face difficulties in obtaining medical images for their research purposes.
GAN has been used for generating synthetic medical images, such as MRI and PET images to address this challenge.
GAN can be used to detect glaucomatous images helping the early diagnosis which is essential to avoid partial or total loss of vision.
GANs have been used to create forensic facial reconstructions of deceased historical figures.
that looks deceptively like a photograph of a real person.
This image was generated by a StyleGAN based on an analysis of portraits. thumbAnother example of a GAN-generated portrait Concerns have been raised about the potential use of GAN-based human image synthesis for sinister purposes, e.g., to produce fake, possibly incriminating, photographs and videos.
GANs can be used to generate unique, realistic profile photos of people who do not exist, in order to automate creation of fake social media profiles.
In 2019 the state of California considered and passed on October 3, 2019, the https:leginfo.legislature.ca.govfacesbillTextClient.xhtml?bill_id201920200AB602 bill AB-602, which bans the use of human image synthesis technologies to make fake pornography without the consent of the people depicted, and https:leginfo.legislature.ca.govfacesbillTextClient.xhtml?bill_id201920200AB730 bill AB-730, which prohibits distribution of manipulated videos of a political candidate within 60 days of an election.
Both bills were authored by Assembly member Marc Berman and signed by Governor Gavin Newsom.
The laws went into effect in 2020.
DARPA's Media Forensics program studies ways to counteract fake media, including fake media produced using GANs.
GANs can be used to generate art; The Verge wrote in March 2019 that "The images created by GANs have become the defining look of contemporary AI art." GANs can also be used to  inpaint photographs  generate fashion models, shadows, photorealistic renders of interior design, industrial design, shoes, etc.
Such networks were reported to be used by Facebook.
Some have worked with using GAN for artistic creativity, as "creative adversarial network".
A GAN, trained on a set of 15,000 portraits from WikiArt from the 14th to the 19th century, created the 2018 painting Edmond de Belamy, which sold for US432,500.
GANs were used by the video game modding community to up-scale low-resolution 2D textures in old video games by recreating them in 4k or higher resolutions via image training, and then down-sampling them to fit the game's native resolution (resembling supersampling anti-aliasing).
In 2020, Artbreeder was used to create the main antagonist in the sequel to the psychological web horror series Ben Drowned.
The author would later go on to praise GAN applications for their ability to help generate assets for independent artists who are short on budget and manpower.
In May 2020, Nvidia researchers taught an AI system (termed "GameGAN") to recreate the game of Pac-Man simply by watching it being played.
In August 2019, a large dataset consisting of 12,197 MIDI songs each with paired lyrics and melody alignment was created for neural melody generation from lyrics using conditional GAN-LSTM (refer to sources at GitHub https:github.comyy1labLyrics-Conditioned-Neural-Melody-Generation AI Melody Generation from Lyrics).
GANs have been used to  show how an individual's appearance might change with age.
 reconstruct 3D models of objects from images,  generate novel objects as 3D point clouds,  model patterns of motion in video.
 inpaint missing features in maps, transfer map styles in cartography or augment street view imagery.
 use feedback to generate images and replace image search systems.
 visualize the effect that climate change will have on specific houses.
 reconstruct an image of a person's face after listening to their voice.
 produces videos of a person speaking, given only a single photo of that person.
 recurrent sequence generation.
In 1991, Juergen Schmidhuber published "artificial curiosity", neural networks in a zero-sum game.
The first network is a generative model that models a probability distribution over output patterns.
The second network learns by gradient descent to predict the reactions of the environment to these patterns.
GANs can be regarded as a case where the environmental reaction is 1 or 0 depending on whether the first network's output is in a given set.
Other people had similar ideas but did not develop them similarly.
An idea involving adversarial networks was published in a 2010 blog post by Olli Niemitalo.
This idea was never implemented and did not involve stochasticity in the generator and thus was not a generative model.
An idea similar to GANs was used to model animal behavior by Wei Li, Melvin Gauci and Roderich Gross in 2013.
Another inspiration for GANs was noise-contrastive estimation, which uses the same loss function as GANs and which Goodfellow studied during his PhD in 20102014.
Adversarial machine learning has other uses besides generative modeling and can be applied to models other than neural networks.
In control theory, adversarial learning based on neural networks was used in 2006 to train robust controllers in a game theoretic sense, by alternating the iterations between a minimizer policy, the controller, and a maximizer policy, the disturbance.
In 2017, a GAN was used for image enhancement focusing on realistic textures rather than pixel-accuracy, producing a higher image quality at high magnification.
In 2017, the first faces were generated.
These were exhibited in February 2018 at the Grand Palais.
Faces generated by StyleGAN in 2019 drew comparisons with Deepfakes.
   https:www.thispersondoesnotexist.com This Person Does Not Exist photorealistic images of people who do not exist, generated by StyleGAN  https:thiscatdoesnotexist.com This Cat Does Not Exist photorealistic images of cats who do not exist, generated by StyleGAN 