In machine learning, support vector machines (SVMs, also support vector networks SVMs are one of the most studied models, being based on statistical learning frameworks of VC theory proposed by Vapnik (1982, 1995) and Chervonenkis (1974).
In addition to performing linear classification, SVMs can efficiently perform non-linear classification using the kernel trick, representing the data only through a set of pairwise similarity comparisons between the original data points using a kernel function, which transforms them into coordinates in a higher-dimensional feature space.
Thus, SVMs use the kernel trick to implicitly map their inputs into high-dimensional feature spaces, where linear classification can be performed.
Being max-margin models, SVMs are resilient to noisy data (e.g., misclassified examples).
SVMs can also be used for regression tasks, where the objective becomes epsilon-sensitive.
The support vector clustering algorithm, created by Hava Siegelmann and Vladimir Vapnik, applies the statistics of support vectors, developed in the support vector machines algorithm, to categorize unlabeled data.
These data sets require unsupervised learning approaches, which attempt to find natural clustering of the data into groups, and then to map new data according to these clusters.
The popularity of SVMs is likely due to their amenability to theoretical analysis, and their flexibility in being applied to a wide variety of tasks, including structured prediction problems.
It is not clear that SVMs have better predictive performance than other linear models, such as logistic regression and linear regression.
Classifying data is a common task in machine learning.
Suppose some given data points each belong to one of two classes, and the goal is to decide which class a new data point will be in.
In the case of support vector machines, a data point is viewed as a p-dimensional vector (a list of p numbers), and we want to know whether we can separate such points with a (p-1)-dimensional hyperplane.
This is called a linear classifier.
There are many hyperplanes that might classify the data.
One reasonable choice as the best hyperplane is the one that represents the largest separation, or margin, between the two classes.
So we choose the hyperplane so that the distance from it to the nearest data point on each side is maximized.
If such a hyperplane exists, it is known as the maximum-margin hyperplane and the linear classifier it defines is known as a maximum-margin classifier; or equivalently, the perceptron of optimal stability.
More formally, a support vector machine constructs a hyperplane or set of hyperplanes in a high or infinite-dimensional space, which can be used for classification, regression, or other tasks like outlier detection.
Intuitively, a good separation is achieved by the hyperplane that has the largest distance to the nearest training-data point of any class (so-called functional margin), since in general the larger the margin, the lower the generalization error of the classifier.
A lower generalization error means that the implementer is less likely to experience overfitting.
Whereas the original problem may be stated in a finite-dimensional space, it often happens that the sets to discriminate are not linearly separable in that space.
For this reason, it was proposed The hyperplanes in the higher-dimensional space are defined as the set of points whose dot product with a vector in that space is constant, where such a set of vectors is an orthogonal (and thus minimal) set of vectors that defines a hyperplane.
The vectors defining the hyperplanes can be chosen to be linear combinations with parameters alpha_i of images of feature vectors x_i that occur in the data base.
With this choice of a hyperplane, the points x in the feature space that are mapped into the hyperplane are defined by the relation textstylesum_i alpha_i k(x_i, x)  textconstant.
Note that if k(x, y) becomes small as y grows further away from x, each term in the sum measures the degree of closeness of the test point x to the corresponding data base point x_i.
In this way, the sum of kernels above can be used to measure the relative nearness of each test point to the data points originating in one or the other of the sets to be discriminated.
Note the fact that the set of points x mapped into any hyperplane can be quite convoluted as a result, allowing much more complex discrimination between sets that are not convex at all in the original space.
SVMs can be used to solve various real-world problems:  SVMs are helpful in text and hypertext categorization, as their application can significantly reduce the need for labeled training instances in both the standard inductive and transductive settings.
Some methods for shallow semantic parsing are based on support vector machines.
 Classification of images can also be performed using SVMs.
Experimental results show that SVMs achieve significantly higher search accuracy than traditional query refinement schemes after just three to four rounds of relevance feedback.
This is also true for image segmentation systems, including those using a modified version SVM that uses the privileged approach as suggested by Vapnik.
 Classification of satellite data like SAR data using supervised SVM.
 Hand-written characters can be recognized using SVM.
 The SVM algorithm has been widely applied in the biological and other sciences.
They have been used to classify proteins with up to 90 of the compounds classified correctly.
Permutation tests based on SVM weights have been suggested as a mechanism for interpretation of SVM models.
Support vector machine weights have also been used to interpret SVM models in the past.
Posthoc interpretation of support vector machine models in order to identify features used by the model to make predictions is a relatively new area of research with special significance in the biological sciences.
The original SVM algorithm was invented by Vladimir N.
Vapnik and Alexey Ya.
Chervonenkis in 1964.
In 1992, Bernhard Boser, Isabelle Guyon and Vladimir Vapnik suggested a way to create nonlinear classifiers by applying the kernel trick to maximum-margin hyperplanes.
The "soft margin" incarnation, as is commonly used in software packages, was proposed by Corinna Cortes and Vapnik in 1993 and published in 1995.
We are given a training dataset of n points of the form (mathbfx_1, y_1), ldots, (mathbfx_n, y_n), where the y_i are either 1 or 1, each indicating the class to which the point mathbfx_i belongs.
Each mathbfx_i is a p-dimensional real vector.
We want to find the "maximum-margin hyperplane" that divides the group of points mathbfx_i for which y_i  1 from the group of points for which y_i  -1, which is defined so that the distance between the hyperplane and the nearest point mathbfx_i from either group is maximized.
Any hyperplane can be written as the set of points mathbfx satisfying mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx - b  0, where mathbfw is the (not necessarily normalized) normal vector to the hyperplane.
This is much like Hesse normal form, except that mathbfw is not necessarily a unit vector.
The parameter tfracbmathbfw determines the offset of the hyperplane from the origin along the normal vector mathbfw.
Warning: most of the literature on the subject defines the bias so that mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx  b  0.
If the training data is linearly separable, we can select two parallel hyperplanes that separate the two classes of data, so that the distance between them is as large as possible.
The region bounded by these two hyperplanes is called the "margin", and the maximum-margin hyperplane is the hyperplane that lies halfway between them.
With a normalized or standardized dataset, these hyperplanes can be described by the equations : mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx - b  1 (anything on or above this boundary is of one class, with label 1) and : mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx - b  -1 (anything on or below this boundary is of the other class, with label 1).
Geometrically, the distance between these two hyperplanes is tfrac2mathbfw, so to maximize the distance between the planes we want to minimize mathbfw.
The distance is computed using the distance from a point to a plane equation.
We also have to prevent data points from falling into the margin, we add the following constraint: for each i either mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b ge 1 , , text if  y_i  1, or mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b le -1 , , text if  y_i  -1.
These constraints state that each data point must lie on the correct side of the margin.
This can be rewritten as  We can put this together to get the optimization problem: beginalign undersetmathbfw,;boperatornameminimize  frac12mathbfw2 textsubject to  y_i(mathbfwtop mathbfx_i - b) geq 1 quad forall i in 1,dots,n endalign The mathbfw and b that solve this problem determine the final classifier, mathbfx mapsto sgn(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx - b), where sgn(cdot) is the sign function.
An important consequence of this geometric description is that the max-margin hyperplane is completely determined by those mathbfx_i that lie nearest to it (explained below).
These mathbfx_i are called support vectors.
To extend SVM to cases in which the data are not linearly separable, the hinge loss function is helpful maxleft(0, 1 - y_i(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b)right).
Note that y_i is the i-th target (i.e., in this case, 1 or 1), and mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b is the i-th output.
This function is zero if the constraint in is satisfied, in other words, if mathbfx_i lies on the correct side of the margin.
For data on the wrong side of the margin, the function's value is proportional to the distance from the margin.
The goal of the optimization then is to minimize: lVert mathbfw rVert2  C leftfrac 1 n sum_i1n maxleft(0, 1 - y_i(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b)right) right, where the parameter C  0 determines the trade-off between increasing the margin size and ensuring that the mathbfx_i lie on the correct side of the margin (Note we can add a weight to either term in the equation above).
By deconstructing the hinge loss, this optimization problem can be formulated into the following: beginalign undersetmathbfw,;b,;mathbfzetaoperatornameminimize mathbfw_22  Csum_i1n zeta_i textsubject to  y_i(mathbfwtop mathbfx_i - b) geq 1 - zeta_i, quad zeta_i geq 0 quad forall iin 1,dots,n endalign Thus, for large values of C, it will behave similar to the hard-margin SVM, if the input data are linearly classifiable, but will still learn if a classification rule is viable or not.
The original maximum-margin hyperplane algorithm proposed by Vapnik in 1963 constructed a linear classifier.
However, in 1992, Bernhard Boser, Isabelle Guyon and Vladimir Vapnik suggested a way to create nonlinear classifiers by applying the kernel trick (originally proposed by Aizerman et al.) to maximum-margin hyperplanes.
Some common kernels include:  Polynomial (homogeneous): k(mathbfx_i, mathbfx_j)  (mathbfx_i cdot mathbfx_j)d.
Particularly, when d  1, this becomes the linear kernel.
 Polynomial (inhomogeneous): k(mathbfx_i, mathbfx_j)  (mathbfx_i cdot mathbfx_j  r)d.
 Gaussian radial basis function: k(mathbfx_i, mathbfx_j)  expleft(-gamma leftmathbfx_i - mathbfx_jright2right) for gamma  0.
Sometimes parametrized using gamma  1(2sigma2).
 Sigmoid function (Hyperbolic tangent): k(mathbfx_i, mathbfx_j)  tanh(kappa mathbfx_i cdot mathbfx_j  c) for some (not every) kappa  0 and c .
The kernel is related to the transform varphi(mathbfx_i) by the equation k(mathbfx_i, mathbfx_j)  varphi(mathbfx_i) cdot varphi(mathbfx_j).
The value is also in the transformed space, with mathbfw  sum_i alpha_i y_i varphi(mathbfx_i).
Dot products with for classification can again be computed by the kernel trick, i.e.
mathbfw cdot varphi(mathbfx)  sum_i alpha_i y_i k(mathbfx_i, mathbfx).
Computing the (soft-margin) SVM classifier amounts to minimizing an expression of the form  We focus on the soft-margin classifier since, as noted above, choosing a sufficiently small value for lambda yields the hard-margin classifier for linearly classifiable input data.
The classical approach, which involves reducing to a quadratic programming problem, is detailed below.
Then, more recent approaches such as sub-gradient descent and coordinate descent will be discussed.
Minimizing can be rewritten as a constrained optimization problem with a differentiable objective function in the following way.
For each i in 1,,ldots,,n we introduce a variable zeta_i  maxleft(0, 1 - y_i(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b)right).
Note that zeta_i is the smallest nonnegative number satisfying y_i(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b) geq 1 - zeta_i.
Thus we can rewrite the optimization problem as follows beginalign textminimize  frac 1 n sum_i1n zeta_i  lambda mathbfw2 0.5ex textsubject to  y_ileft(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - bright) geq 1 - zeta_i , text and  , zeta_i geq 0,, textfor all  i.
endalign This is called the primal problem.
By solving for the Lagrangian dual of the above problem, one obtains the simplified problem beginalign textmaximize,, f(c_1 ldots c_n)  sum_i1n c_i - frac 1 2 sum_i1nsum_j1n y_i c_i(mathbfx_imathsfT mathbfx_j)y_j c_j,  textsubject to  sum_i1n c_iy_i  0,,textand  0 leq c_i leq frac12nlambda;textfor all i.
endalign This is called the dual problem.
Since the dual maximization problem is a quadratic function of the c_i subject to linear constraints, it is efficiently solvable by quadratic programming algorithms.
Here, the variables c_i are defined such that mathbfw  sum_i1n c_iy_i mathbfx_i.
Moreover, c_i  0 exactly when mathbfx_i lies on the correct side of the margin, and 0 when mathbfx_i lies on the margin's boundary.
It follows that mathbfw can be written as a linear combination of the support vectors.
The offset, b, can be recovered by finding an mathbfx_i on the margin's boundary and solving y_i(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b)  1 iff b  mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - y_i .
(Note that y_i-1y_i since y_ipm 1.) .
Suppose now that we would like to learn a nonlinear classification rule which corresponds to a linear classification rule for the transformed data points varphi(mathbfx_i).
Moreover, we are given a kernel function k which satisfies k(mathbfx_i, mathbfx_j)  varphi(mathbfx_i) cdot varphi(mathbfx_j).
We know the classification vector mathbfw in the transformed space satisfies mathbfw  sum_i1n c_iy_ivarphi(mathbfx_i), where, the c_i are obtained by solving the optimization problem beginalign textmaximize,, f(c_1 ldots c_n)  sum_i1n c_i - frac 1 2 sum_i1nsum_j1n y_ic_i(varphi(mathbfx_i) cdot varphi(mathbfx_j))y_jc_j   sum_i1n c_i - frac 1 2 sum_i1nsum_j1n y_ic_ik(mathbfx_i, mathbfx_j)y_jc_j  textsubject to  sum_i1n c_i y_i  0,,textand  0 leq c_i leq frac12nlambda;textfor all i.
endalign The coefficients c_i can be solved for using quadratic programming, as before.
Again, we can find some index i such that 0 , so that varphi(mathbfx_i) lies on the boundary of the margin in the transformed space, and then solve beginalign b  mathbfwmathsfT varphi(mathbfx_i) - y_i  leftsum_j1n c_jy_jvarphi(mathbfx_j) cdot varphi(mathbfx_i)right - y_i   leftsum_j1n c_jy_jk(mathbfx_j, mathbfx_i)right - y_i.
endalign Finally, mathbfz mapsto sgn(mathbfwmathsfT varphi(mathbfz) - b)  sgn left(leftsum_i1n c_iy_ik(mathbfx_i, mathbfz)right - bright).
Recent algorithms for finding the SVM classifier include sub-gradient descent and coordinate descent.
Both techniques have proven to offer significant advantages over the traditional approach when dealing with large, sparse datasetssub-gradient methods are especially efficient when there are many training examples, and coordinate descent when the dimension of the feature space is high.
Sub-gradient descent algorithms for the SVM work directly with the expression f(mathbfw, b)  leftfrac 1 n sum_i1n maxleft(0, 1 - y_i(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx_i - b)right) right  lambda mathbfw2.
Note that f is a convex function of mathbfw and b.
As such, traditional gradient descent (or SGD) methods can be adapted, where instead of taking a step in the direction of the function's gradient, a step is taken in the direction of a vector selected from the function's sub-gradient.
This approach has the advantage that, for certain implementations, the number of iterations does not scale with n, the number of data points.
Coordinate descent algorithms for the SVM work from the dual problem beginalign textmaximize,, f(c_1 ldots c_n)  sum_i1n c_i - frac 1 2 sum_i1nsum_j1n y_i c_i(x_i cdot x_j)y_j c_j, textsubject to  sum_i1n c_iy_i  0,,textand  0 leq c_i leq frac12nlambda;textfor all i.
endalign For each i in 1,, ldots,, n, iteratively, the coefficient c_i is adjusted in the direction of partial f partial c_i.
Then, the resulting vector of coefficients (c_1',,ldots,,c_n') is projected onto the nearest vector of coefficients that satisfies the given constraints.
(Typically Euclidean distances are used.) The process is then repeated until a near-optimal vector of coefficients is obtained.
The resulting algorithm is extremely fast in practice, although few performance guarantees have been proven.
The soft-margin support vector machine described above is an example of an empirical risk minimization (ERM) algorithm for the hinge loss.
Seen this way, support vector machines belong to a natural class of algorithms for statistical inference, and many of its unique features are due to the behavior of the hinge loss.
This perspective can provide further insight into how and why SVMs work, and allow us to better analyze their statistical properties.
In supervised learning, one is given a set of training examples X_1 ldots X_n with labels y_1 ldots y_n, and wishes to predict y_n1 given X_n1.
To do so one forms a hypothesis, f, such that f(X_n1) is a "good" approximation of y_n1.
A "good" approximation is usually defined with the help of a loss function, ell(y,z), which characterizes how bad z is as a prediction of y.
We would then like to choose a hypothesis that minimizes the expected risk: varepsilon(f)  mathbbEleftell(y_n1, f(X_n1)) right.
In most cases, we don't know the joint distribution of X_n1,,y_n1 outright.
In these cases, a common strategy is to choose the hypothesis that minimizes the empirical risk: hat varepsilon(f)  frac 1 n sum_k1n ell(y_k, f(X_k)).
Under certain assumptions about the sequence of random variables X_k,, y_k (for example, that they are generated by a finite Markov process), if the set of hypotheses being considered is small enough, the minimizer of the empirical risk will closely approximate the minimizer of the expected risk as n grows large.
This approach is called empirical risk minimization, or ERM.
In order for the minimization problem to have a well-defined solution, we have to place constraints on the set mathcalH of hypotheses being considered.
If mathcalH is a normed space (as is the case for SVM), a particularly effective technique is to consider only those hypotheses f for which lVert f rVert_mathcal H .
This is equivalent to imposing a regularization penalty mathcal R(f)  lambda_klVert f rVert_mathcal H, and solving the new optimization problem hat f  mathrmargmin_f in mathcalH hat varepsilon(f)  mathcalR(f).
This approach is called Tikhonov regularization.
More generally, mathcalR(f) can be some measure of the complexity of the hypothesis f, so that simpler hypotheses are preferred.
Recall that the (soft-margin) SVM classifier hatmathbfw, b: mathbfx mapsto sgn(hatmathbfwmathsfT mathbfx - b) is chosen to minimize the following expression: leftfrac 1 n sum_i1n maxleft(0, 1 - y_i(mathbfwmathsfT mathbfx - b)right) right  lambda mathbfw2.
In light of the above discussion, we see that the SVM technique is equivalent to empirical risk minimization with Tikhonov regularization, where in this case the loss function is the hinge loss ell(y,z)  maxleft(0, 1 - yz right).
From this perspective, SVM is closely related to other fundamental classification algorithms such as regularized least-squares and logistic regression.
The difference between the three lies in the choice of loss function: regularized least-squares amounts to empirical risk minimization with the square-loss, ell_sq(y,z)  (y-z)2; logistic regression employs the log-loss, ell_log(y,z)  ln(1  e-yz).
The difference between the hinge loss and these other loss functions is best stated in terms of target functions - the function that minimizes expected risk for a given pair of random variables X,,y.
In particular, let y_x denote y conditional on the event that X  x.
In the classification setting, we have: y_x  begincases 1  textwith probability  p_x  -1  textwith probability  1-p_x endcases The optimal classifier is therefore: f(x)  begincases1  textif p_x geq 12  -1  textotherwiseendcases For the square-loss, the target function is the conditional expectation function, f_sq(x)  mathbbElefty_xright; For the logistic loss, it's the logit function, f_log(x)  lnleft(p_x  (1-p_x)right).
While both of these target functions yield the correct classifier, as sgn(f_sq)  sgn(f_log)  f, they give us more information than we need.
In fact, they give us enough information to completely describe the distribution of y_x.
On the other hand, one can check that the target function for the hinge loss is exactly f.
Thus, in a sufficiently rich hypothesis spaceor equivalently, for an appropriately chosen kernelthe SVM classifier will converge to the simplest function (in terms of mathcalR) that correctly classifies the data.
This extends the geometric interpretation of SVMfor linear classification, the empirical risk is minimized by any function whose margins lie between the support vectors, and the simplest of these is the max-margin classifier.
SVMs belong to a family of generalized linear classifiers and can be interpreted as an extension of the perceptron.
They can also be considered a special case of Tikhonov regularization.
A special property is that they simultaneously minimize the empirical classification error and maximize the geometric margin; hence they are also known as maximum margin classifiers.
A comparison of the SVM to other classifiers has been made by Meyer, Leisch and Hornik.
The effectiveness of SVM depends on the selection of kernel, the kernel's parameters, and soft margin parameter lambda.
A common choice is a Gaussian kernel, which has a single parameter gamma.
The best combination of lambda and gamma is often selected by a grid search with exponentially growing sequences of lambda and gamma, for example, lambda in  2-5, 2-3, dots, 213,215 ; gamma in  2-15,2-13, dots, 21,23 .
Typically, each combination of parameter choices is checked using cross validation, and the parameters with best cross-validation accuracy are picked.
Alternatively, recent work in Bayesian optimization can be used to select lambda and gamma , often requiring the evaluation of far fewer parameter combinations than grid search.
The final model, which is used for testing and for classifying new data, is then trained on the whole training set using the selected parameters.
Potential drawbacks of the SVM include the following aspects:  Requires full labeling of input data  Uncalibrated class membership probabilitiesSVM stems from Vapnik's theory which avoids estimating probabilities on finite data  The SVM is only directly applicable for two-class tasks.
Therefore, algorithms that reduce the multi-class task to several binary problems have to be applied; see the multi-class SVM section.
 Parameters of a solved model are difficult to interpret.
Multiclass SVM aims to assign labels to instances by using support vector machines, where the labels are drawn from a finite set of several elements.
The dominant approach for doing so is to reduce the single multiclass problem into multiple binary classification problems.
Common methods for such reduction include:  Building binary classifiers that distinguish between one of the labels and the rest (one-versus-all) or between every pair of classes (one-versus-one).
Classification of new instances for the one-versus-all case is done by a winner-takes-all strategy, in which the classifier with the highest-output function assigns the class (it is important that the output functions be calibrated to produce comparable scores).
For the one-versus-one approach, classification is done by a max-wins voting strategy, in which every classifier assigns the instance to one of the two classes, then the vote for the assigned class is increased by one vote, and finally the class with the most votes determines the instance classification.
 Directed acyclic graph SVM (DAGSVM)  Error-correcting output codes Crammer and Singer proposed a multiclass SVM method which casts the multiclass classification problem into a single optimization problem, rather than decomposing it into multiple binary classification problems.
See also Lee, Lin and Wahba and Van den Burg and Groenen.
Transductive support vector machines extend SVMs in that they could also treat partially labeled data in semi-supervised learning by following the principles of transduction.
Here, in addition to the training set mathcalD, the learner is also given a set mathcalDstar   mathbfxstar_i mid mathbfxstar_i in mathbbRp_i1k of test examples to be classified.
Formally, a transductive support vector machine is defined by the following primal optimization problem: Minimize (in mathbfw, b, mathbfystar) frac12mathbfw2 subject to (for any i  1, dots, n and any j  1, dots, k) beginalign y_i(mathbfw cdot mathbfx_i - b) ge 1,  ystar_j(mathbfw cdot mathbfxstar_j - b) ge 1, endalign and ystar_j in -1, 1.
Transductive support vector machines were introduced by Vladimir N.
Structured support-vector machine is an extension of the traditional SVM model.
While the SVM model is primarily designed for binary classification, multiclass classification, and regression tasks, structured SVM broadens its application to handle general structured output labels, for example parse trees, classification with taxonomies, sequence alignment and many more.
A version of SVM for regression was proposed in 1996 by Vladimir N.
Vapnik, Harris Drucker, Christopher J.
Burges, Linda Kaufman and Alexander J.
This method is called support vector regression (SVR).
The model produced by support vector classification (as described above) depends only on a subset of the training data, because the cost function for building the model does not care about training points that lie beyond the margin.
Analogously, the model produced by SVR depends only on a subset of the training data, because the cost function for building the model ignores any training data close to the model prediction.
Another SVM version known as least-squares support vector machine (LS-SVM) has been proposed by Suykens and Vandewalle.
Training the original SVR means solving : minimize tfrac12 w2 : subject to  y_i - langle w, x_i rangle - b  le varepsilon where x_i is a training sample with target value y_i.
The inner product plus intercept langle w, x_i rangle  b is the prediction for that sample, and varepsilon is a free parameter that serves as a threshold: all predictions have to be within an varepsilon range of the true predictions.
Slack variables are usually added into the above to allow for errors and to allow approximation in the case the above problem is infeasible.
In 2011 it was shown by Polson and Scott that the SVM admits a Bayesian interpretation through the technique of data augmentation.
In this approach the SVM is viewed as a graphical model (where the parameters are connected via probability distributions).
This extended view allows the application of Bayesian techniques to SVMs, such as flexible feature modeling, automatic hyperparameter tuning, and predictive uncertainty quantification.
In 2017, a scalable version of the Bayesian SVM was developed by https:arxiv.orgsearchstat?searchtypeauthorqueryWenzel2CF Florian Wenzel, enabling the application of Bayesian SVMs to big data.
Florian Wenzel developed two different versions, a variational inference (VI) scheme for the Bayesian kernel support vector machine (SVM) and a stochastic version (SVI) for the linear Bayesian SVM.
The parameters of the maximum-margin hyperplane are derived by solving the optimization.
There exist several specialized algorithms for quickly solving the quadratic programming (QP) problem that arises from SVMs, mostly relying on heuristics for breaking the problem down into smaller, more manageable chunks.
Another approach is to use an interior-point method that uses Newton-like iterations to find a solution of the KarushKuhnTucker conditions of the primal and dual problems.
Instead of solving a sequence of broken-down problems, this approach directly solves the problem altogether.
To avoid solving a linear system involving the large kernel matrix, a low-rank approximation to the matrix is often used in the kernel trick.
Another common method is Platt's sequential minimal optimization (SMO) algorithm, which breaks the problem down into 2-dimensional sub-problems that are solved analytically, eliminating the need for a numerical optimization algorithm and matrix storage.
This algorithm is conceptually simple, easy to implement, generally faster, and has better scaling properties for difficult SVM problems.
The special case of linear support vector machines can be solved more efficiently by the same kind of algorithms used to optimize its close cousin, logistic regression; this class of algorithms includes sub-gradient descent (e.g., PEGASOS) and coordinate descent (e.g., LIBLINEAR).
LIBLINEAR has some attractive training-time properties.
Each convergence iteration takes time linear in the time taken to read the train data, and the iterations also have a Q-linear convergence property, making the algorithm extremely fast.
The general kernel SVMs can also be solved more efficiently using sub-gradient descent (e.g.
P-packSVM), especially when parallelization is allowed.
Kernel SVMs are available in many machine-learning toolkits, including LIBSVM, MATLAB, http:support.sas.comdocumentationcdlenwhatsnew64209HTMLdefaultviewer.htmemdocwhatsnew71.htm SAS, SVMlight, https:cran.r-project.orgpackagekernlab kernlab, scikit-learn, Shogun, Weka, http:image.diku.dkshark Shark, https:mloss.orgsoftwareview409 JKernelMachines, OpenCV and others.
Preprocessing of data (standardization) is highly recommended to enhance accuracy of classification.
There are a few methods of standardization, such as min-max, normalization by decimal scaling, Z-score.
Subtraction of mean and division by variance of each feature is usually used for SVM.
 In situ adaptive tabulation  Kernel machines  Fisher kernel  Platt scaling  Polynomial kernel  Predictive analytics  Regularization perspectives on support vector machines  Relevance vector machine, a probabilistic sparse-kernel model identical in functional form to SVM  Sequential minimal optimization  Space mapping  Winnow (algorithm)  Radial basis function network .
 http:www.csie.ntu.edu.twcjlinlibsvm libsvm, LIBSVM is a popular library of SVM learners  http:www.csie.ntu.edu.twcjlinliblinear liblinear is a library for large linear classification including some SVMs  http:svmlight.joachims.org SVM light is a collection of software tools for learning and classification using SVM  http:cs.stanford.edupeoplekarpathysvmjsdemo SVMJS live demo is a GUI demo for JavaScript implementation of SVMs