Transfer learning (TL) is a technique in machine learning (ML) in which knowledge learned from a task is re-used in order to boost performance on a related task.
For example, for image classification, knowledge gained while learning to recognize cars could be applied when trying to recognize trucks.
This topic is related to the psychological literature on transfer of learning, although practical ties between the two fields are limited.
Reusing or transferring information from previously learned tasks to new tasks has the potential to significantly improve learning efficiency.
Since transfer learning makes use of training with multiple objective functions it is related to cost-sensitive machine learning and multi-objective optimization.
In 1976, Bozinovski and Fulgosi published a paper addressing transfer learning in neural network training.
The paper gives a mathematical and geometrical model of the topic.
In 1981, a report considered the application of transfer learning to a dataset of images representing letters of computer terminals, experimentally demonstrating positive and negative transfer learning.
In 1992, Lorien Pratt formulated the discriminability-based transfer (DBT) algorithm.
By 1998, the field had advanced to include multi-task learning, along with more formal theoretical foundations.
Influential publications on transfer learning include the book Learning to Learn in 1998, a 2009 survey and a 2019 survey.
Ng said in his NIPS 2016 tutorial that TL would become the next driver of machine learning commercial success after supervised learning.
In the 2020 paper, "Rethinking Pre-Training and self-training", Zoph et al.
reported that pre-training can hurt accuracy, and advocate self-training instead.
The definition of transfer learning is given in terms of domains and tasks.
A domain mathcalD consists of: a feature space mathcalX and a marginal probability distribution P(X), where X  x_1,...,x_n in mathcalX.
Given a specific domain, mathcalD  mathcalX, P(X), a task consists of two components: a label space mathcalY and an objective predictive function f:mathcalX rightarrow mathcalY .
The function f is used to predict the corresponding label f(x) of a new instance x.
This task, denoted by mathcalT  mathcalY, f(x), is learned from the training data consisting of pairs x_i, y_i, where x_i in mathcalX and y_i in mathcalY.
Given a source domain mathcalD_S and learning task mathcalT_S, a target domain mathcalD_T and learning task mathcalT_T, where mathcalD_S neq mathcalD_T, or mathcalT_S neq mathcalT_T, transfer learning aims to help improve the learning of the target predictive function f_T (cdot) in mathcalD_T using the knowledge in mathcalD_S and mathcalT_S.
and Bayesian networks.
Transfer learning has been applied to cancer subtype discovery, building utilization, general game playing, text classification, digit recognition, medical imaging and spam filtering.
In 2020, it was discovered that, due to their similar physical natures, transfer learning is possible between electromyographic (EMG) signals from the muscles and classifying the behaviors of electroencephalographic (EEG) brainwaves, from the gesture recognition domain to the mental state recognition domain.
It was noted that this relationship worked in both directions, showing that EEG brainwaves can likewise be used to classify EMG signals.
The experiments noted that the accuracy of neural networks and convolutional neural networks were improved through transfer learning both prior to any learning (compared to standard random weight distribution) and at the end of the learning process (asymptote).
That is, results are improved by exposure to another domain.
Moreover, the end-user of a pre-trained model can change the structure of fully-connected layers to improve performance.
 Crossover (genetic algorithm)  Domain adaptation  General game playing  Multi-task learning  Multitask optimization  Transfer of learning  Zero-shot learning  Few-shot learning  Feature learning  external validity .
 titleLearning to Learnlast1Thrunfirst1Sebastianlast2Prattfirst2Loriendate6 December 2012publisherSpringer Science  Business Mediaisbn978-1-4615-5529-2